<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>章节</title>
  <link href="../Styles/main.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
</head>

<body>

  <h2 class="title3">To Miss Clegg</h2>
  <p class="intitle">1<br/><span class="pretxt">1926.4.16</span></p>
  <p class="post">31.St.James's Squre</p>
  <p class="post">Holland Park</p>
  <p class="post">W.11</p>
  <p class="post">April 16, 1926</p>
  <p class="rm">Dear Miss Clegg</p>
  <blockquote>
    <p>Thank you for your kind letter and I am going to Miss Ayscough on Saturday morning. I send a note to him too.</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p class="lk">Yours Sincerely</p>
  <p class="lk">C.C.Shu</p>

  <p class="intitle">2<br/><span class="pretxt">1926.6.6</span></p>
  <p class="post">31.St.James's Square</p>
  <p class="post">Holland Park</p>
  <p class="post">W-11</p>
  <p class="post">6 June 1926</p>
  <p class="rm">Dear Miss Clegg</p>
  <blockquote>
    <p>Would you be kind enough to furnish me with certain information regarding the Contract between the school and myself. Before I started for England from Peking in 1924, I signed it at Miss Wood's school, but I have never had an acknowlegement of it and I do not know whether she sent it to the school on to Dr. Rees. In the latter case, it is very probable that it was never dilivered to the school, as the death of Dr. Rees occured at that time. It is, I belive, the English custom for a Contract to be signed by both parties, and a copy kept by each with the other's signature. Since I do not know whether Miss Wood returned the copy with by signature of the authorization of the school. Now, I beg you to tell me, firstly, whether Miss Wood returned the contract, and secondly, I wish to have a copy signed by the school. Although I still remember all the Conditions of my Contract, yet, I wish to have a copy in my possession I should be much obliged, if you would be kind enough to accomplish my request.</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p class="lk">Yours Sincerely,</p>
  <p class="lk">C.C.Shu</p>

  <p class="intitle">3<br/><span class="pretxt">1928.9.1</span></p>
  <p class="post">14.Torrington Square</p>
  <p class="post">W.C.1</p>
  <p class="post">1.9.28</p>
  <p class="rm">Dear Madam</p>
  <blockquote>
    <p>I beg to inform you that I am going away next Monday for my holiday. Please keep all my letters until further notice. Thank you very much.</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p class="lk">Yours Faithfully,</p>
  <p class="lk">C.C.Shu</p>

  <p class="intitle">4<br/><span class="pretxt">1928.9.4</span></p>
  <p class="post">Waverley Hotel,</p>
  <p class="post">Howth</p>
  <p class="post">Dublin, Jreland</p>
  <p class="post">4.9.28</p>
  <p class="rm">Dear Madam</p>
  <blockquote>
    <p>I am staying at the Waverley Hotel to which my letters should be kindly forwarded.</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p class="lk">Yours Faithfully,</p>
  <p class="lk">C.C.Shu</p>

  <p class="intitle">5<br/><span class="pretxt">1928.9.27</span></p>
  <p class="post">Waverley Hotel,</p>
  <p class="post">Howth.</p>
  <p class="post">27.9.28</p>
  <p class="rm">Dear Madam</p>
  <blockquote>
    <p>I beg to inform you that I am coming back to Landon tomorrow. Please kindly keep all my letters until I come to the school. Thank you very much.</p>
  </blockquote>
  <p class="lk">Yours Faithfully,</p>
  <p class="lk">C.C.Shu</p>




</body>
</html>
