<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<!--?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?--><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
    <title>未知</title>
    <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
    <link href="../Styles/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

</head>
  <body>
  <h1 id="aid-3CN041">参考书目</h1>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">以下按章节列出的书籍，与其说是本书的参考书目，不如说是一份简要的读书指南。这份极具特色的指南包括书籍和少许论文，均为与中国晚清历史有关的英文资料。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">序言</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Albert Feuerwerker, ed.，History in Communist China（Cambridge：M. I.T.University Press，1968）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一本关于中国共产主义史学的优秀论文集。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">James P. Harrison, The Communists and Chinese Peasant Rebellions（New York：Atheneum，1969）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">现代中国对民众运动所持的历史态度一直都在改变。哈里森教授不仅在本书中追溯了这一变化的过程，还提供了大量与类似起义有关的信息。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第一章　农民</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Mark Elvin, The Pattern of the Chinese Past（London：Methuen，1973）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一份关于中国社会历史的调查。力荐。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Fei Hsiao-T'ung, Peasant Life in China：A Field Study of Country Life in the Yangtze Valley（London：Kegan Paul，1943）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">中国当代首屈一指的人类学家——费孝通先生在乡村研究领域的经典之作。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Maurice Freedman, Lineage Organization in Southeastern China（London：Athlone，1958）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">尽管弗里德曼的某些结论如今颇有争议，他关于华南地区宗族组织的著作，依然是同类著作中最优秀的。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Ho Ping-Ti, Studies on the Population of China，1368—1953（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1959）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一部里程碑式的著作。了解中国社会历史的必备书，值得精读。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Ramon H. Myers, The Chinese Peasant Economy：Agricultural Development in Hopei and Shantung（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1970）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这篇研究华北地区农民经济的论文挑战了马克思主义学者的观点。尤其推荐序言中关于史料编纂学的调查报告。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Evelyn Sakakida Rawski, Agricultural Change and the Peasant Economy of South China（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1972）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">作者促使其他学者重新评估他们关于明清时期农民历史的假设。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Jean Chesneaux, ed.，Popular Movements and Secret Societies in China，1840—1950（Stanford：Stanford University Press，1972）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一本参考书目非常棒的论文集。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Irwin Scheiner，"The Mindful Peasant：Sketches for a　Study of Rebellion，"Journal of Asian Studies（August，1973）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本文尽管着眼于日本农民，但对关注中国农民运动的人来说，仍不失为一篇极具启发性的重要文章。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第二章　士绅</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Chang Chung-Li, The Chinese Gentry：Studies on Their Role in Nineteenth Century Chinese Society（Seattle：University of Washington Press，1955）；and The Income of the Chinese Gentry（Seattle：University of Washington Press，1962）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这两本书都是理解士绅群体，以及该群体职能的必读书。张仲礼对“士绅”的定义完全是以应试为中心的，因此，阅读时应辅以下面两本著作。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Wolfram Eberhard, Social Mobility in Traditional China（Leiden：E. H.Brill，1963）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一本从氏族传承角度入手，从内而外呈现士绅世家的研究著作。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Ho Ping-Ti, The Ladder of Success in Imperial China：Aspects of Social Mobility，1368—1911（New York：John Wiley and Sons，1962）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">何炳棣的这本著作不仅包含许多引人入胜的士绅传记，还讨论了传统中国社会里，社会阶层之间极高的流动率。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Ch'u T'ung-Tsu, Local Government in China under the Ch'ing（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1962）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一本虽有些枯燥，却不乏权威性的地方政府研究著作。接下来的那本书可以作为该书的补充阅读材料。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Hsiao Kung-Chuan, Rural China：Imperial Control in the Nineteenth Century（Seattle：University of Washington Press，1960）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">要想一口气读完此书几乎是不可能的。然而，该书对士绅在正式县衙与非正式地方自治中扮演的角色，做了十分详尽而迷人的阐述。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">John Watt, The District Magistrate in Late Imperial China（New York：Columbia University Press，1972）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">瓦特在这本深思熟虑的著作中，对比了儒家与法家对县级官吏的不同期望。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Frederic Wakeman and Carolyn Grant, eds.，Conflict and Control in Late Imperial China（Berkeley：University of California Press，1975）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这是一本论文集。其中所收录的文章，追溯了从晚明至20世纪间，士绅的演变及民众运动的发展。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第三章　商人</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">W. E.Willmott, Economic Organization in Chinese Society（Stanford：Stanford University Press，1972）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一部关于钱庄、制盐、丝绸和棉花等产业的不可或缺的权威论文集。尤其推荐伊懋可与墨子刻的两篇论文。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Ho Ping-Ti，"The Salt Merchants of Yang-chou：A Study of Commercial Capitalism in Eighteenth Century China，"Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies（1954）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Artiiur Waley, Yuan Mei, Eighteenth Century Chinese Poet（New York：Grove Press，1956）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一本令人愉快的书。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第四章　朝代循环</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Arthur Wright, ed.，Studies in Chinese Thought（Chicago：Chicago University Press）；with David Nivison, Confucianism in Action（Stanford：Stanford University Press，1959），and The Confucian Persuasion（Stanford：Stanford University Press，1960）；and with Denis Twitchett, Confucian Personalities（Stanford：Stanford University Press，1962）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这些著名的论文集里包含的几篇关于中国政治思想和官僚行为的文章，是有史以来这方面最优秀的英文论文。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">C. K.Yang, Religion and Chinese Society：A Study of Contemporary Social Functions of Religion and Some of Their Historical Factors（Berkeley：University of California Press，1961）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这是一本关于宗教社会学结构功能研究的著作。书中展现了上层精英文化与庶民文化交织的过程。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Frederick W. Mote, The Poet Kao Ch'i，1336—1374（Princeton：Princeton University Press，1962）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本书讲述了在朱元璋创立明朝的动乱年代里，诗人高启和他周围朋友的经历。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Charles O. Hucker, The Censorial System of Ming China（Stanford：Stanford University Press，1966）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本书详细分析了明代官僚体系，尤其强调了监察系统与帝国专制政治的对比情况。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">James B. Parsons, The Peasant Rebellions of the Late Ming Dynasty（Tucson：University of Arizona Press，1970）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一本基于中国文献资料所做的晚明民变研究。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第五章　满族的兴起</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Franz Michael, The Origin of Manchu Rule in China：Frontier and Bureaucracy as Interacting Forces in the Chinese Empire（Baltimore：John Hopkins University Press，1942）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这是一本研究17世纪边境地带私人武装的入门书。本书的结论必须要按照法夸尔的研究仔细修订。（参见下一条书目）</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">David M. Farquhar，“Mongolian versus Chinese Elements in the Early Manchu State，”Ch'ing-shih wen-t'i[Bulletin of the Society for Ch'ing Studies]（June，1971）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第六章　清初与盛世</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Robert Oxnam，"The Politics of the Oboi Regency，"Journal of Asian Studies（1973）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一篇十分重要的论文。该论文讲述了顺治驾崩后，满洲亲贵贝勒们采取的严厉政策。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Jonathan Spence, Tsao Yin and the K'ang-hsi Emperor, Bondservant and Master（New Haven：Yale University Press，1966）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一部文笔优美、趣味横生的重要学术著作。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Silas Wu, Communication and Imperial Control in China：Evolution of the Palace Memorial System，1693—1735（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1970）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本书基于新发现的中文史料，确切地说明了康熙和雍正皇帝通过创设私人耳目系统，进一步实现中央集权的过程。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Chang Te-Ch'ang，"The Economic Role of the Imperial Household（Nei-wu-fu）in the Ch'ing Dynasty，"Journal of Asian Studies（February，1972）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">张教授发表这篇论文前，除吴秀良外，几乎没有其他了解内务府的学者。本论文为清史学界开辟了新的视野。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Harold L. Kahn, Monarchy in the Emperor's Eyes：Image and Reality in the Ch'ien-lung Reign（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1971）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">作者用诙谐睿智的文笔，旁征博引地分析了乾隆皇帝的自我形象。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第七章　西方的入侵</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">John K. Fairrank, The Chinese World Order：Traditional China's Foreign Relations（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1968）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这是一部研讨会的论文集。绪论是一篇介绍传统中国藩属外交体系的优秀文章。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Teng Ssu-Yu and John K. Fairbank, eds.，China's Response to the West：A Documentary Survey，1839—1923（New York：Atheneum，1965）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这部加以细致注解和考释的著作涵盖了19世纪到20世纪初的所有史料。本书的导论部分描述了鸦片战争前的中外关系。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">William C. Hunter, The'Fan Kwae'at Canton before Treaty Days，1825—1844（Shanghai：Kelly and Walsh，1911）</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">充满地方色彩的第一手观察资料。近期刚刚再版。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Louis Dermigny, La Chine et l'Occident. La commerce a　Canton au XVIIIe siecle，1719—1833（Paris：S.E.V.P.E.N.，1964），3　Vols.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这是推荐书目中唯一一本非英文著作。将其列入书单的原因很简单：对任何想了解广州贸易体系运作方式的人来说，德米尼的研究都是不可或缺的。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Michael Greenberg, British Trade and the Opening of China，1800—1842（Cambridge, Eng.：Cambridge University Press，1951）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">格林伯格利用港脚贸易事务所的档案，追溯了自由商人涉入鸦片战争的情况。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第八章　入侵与反抗</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Chang Hsin-Pao, Commissioner Lin and the Opium War（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1964）</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">张馨保客观地描述了林则徐在鸦片战争期间的所有活动。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Frederic Wakeman, JR.，Strangers at the Gate：Social Disorder in South China，1839—1861（Berkeley：University of California Press，1966）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本书试图评估鸦片战争给广东带来的社会效应。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">John K. Fairbank, Trade and Diplomacy on the China Coast：The Opening of the Treaty Ports，1842—1854（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1953）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一本经典之作。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Arhur Waley, The Opium War through Chinese Eyes（London：George Allen and Unwin，1958）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本书是韦利的一本著名译作。书中收集了数名中国人（包括林则徐）在鸦片战争期间所写的日记。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Immanuel Hsu, China's Entrance into the Family of Nations：The Diplomatic Phase，1858—1880（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1900）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">该时期最优秀的一部外交史。应该与以下书目一并参看。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Masataka Banno, China and the West，1858—1861：The Origins of the Tsungli Yamen（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1964）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本书尤其适合用来了解当时北京政坛各派系的情况。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Franz Michael, The Taiping Rebellion：History and Documents, Vol. 1（Seattle：University of Washington Press，1965）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一本记录了太平天国各阶段发展情况的佳作。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Jen Yu-Wen, The Taiping Rebellion（New Haven：Yale University Press，1973）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">作者为当世最杰出的太平天国史专家之一。本书是他对这一时期历史百科全书式的研究所得。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Vincent C. Y.Shih, The Taiping Ideology：Its Sources, Interpretations and Influences（Seattle：University of Washington Press，1967）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一部十分详尽的著作。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第九章　复兴的幻象与自强运动</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Mary C. Wright, The Last Stand of Chinese Conservatism：The T'ung-chih Restoration，1862—1874（Stanford：Stanford University Press，1957）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">关于19世纪中国历史最优秀的著作之一。尽管已故芮玛丽教授的部分观点现在颇有争议，但毫无疑问，这部专著还是非常详尽用心的。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Stanley Spector, Li Hung-chang and the Huai Army：A Study in Nineteenth Century Chinese Regionalism（Seattle：University of Washington Press，1964）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">芮玛丽还在关注太平天国动乱之后朝廷的中兴时，史贝克特已开始关注区域政治权力的发展。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Philip Kuhn, Rebellion and Its Enemies in Late Imperial China（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1970）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">另一方面，孔复礼把地方割据和军事化区分开来。本书深刻地影响了历史学者们对晚清的理解。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">K. C.Liu，"Li Hung-chang in Chihli，"in Albert Feuerwerker, ed.，Approaches to Modern Chinese History（Berkeley：University of California Press，1968）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">刘驳斥了史贝克特认为李鸿章是地方实力派的观点。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Joseph R. Levenson, Confucian China and Its Modern Fate（Berkeley：University of California Press，1958—1965），3　vols.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">有史以来所有关于中国知识分子的历史著作中，这一部或许是影响最为深远的。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Albert Feuerwerker, China's Early Industrialization：Sheng Hsuan-huai，1844—1916，and Mandarin Enterprise（Cambridge：Harvard Univer-sity Press，1958）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一本关于“自强运动”失败原因的优秀论著。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">John Rawlinson, China's Struggle for Naval Development，1839—1895（Cambridge，1966）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本书解答了“自强运动”失败的原因。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Lloyd Eastman, Throne and Mandarins：China's Search for a　Policy during the SinoFrench Controversy，1880—1885（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1967）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这是一本极具思想性的著作。其中最有趣的章节，为讲述“清议派”的部分。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第十章　王朝改革与反响</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">William L. Langer, The Diplomacy of Imperialism，1890—1902（New York：Knopf，1951），2　Vols.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">将列强瓜分中国的史实，放在世界格局里讨论。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">John E. Schrecker, Imperialism and Chinese Nationalism：Germany in Shantung（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1971）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">除了分析德国外交政策以外，作者还讲述了清朝官员在维护中国主权方面做出的努力。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Lloyd Eastman，"Political Reformism in China before the Sino-Japanese War，"Journal of Asian Studies（August，1968）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一篇关于何启、郑观应和其他早期政治思想家著作的研究论文。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Hsiao Kung-Gh'uan，"K'ang Yu-wei's Thought，"Chung Chi Journal（1968）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">该论文作者为中国传统政治理论权威，对康有为思想进行了详尽、细致地分析。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Joseph R. Levenson, Liang Ch'i-ch'ao and the Mind of Modern China（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1953）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本书中，梁启超成了中国现代认同危机的试金石。不过，可以参考下列著作的观点，重新评估列文森的这本著作。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Hao Chang, Liang Ch'i-ch'ao and Intellectual Transition in China（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1971）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">列文森笔下的梁启超在文化认同上饱受折磨，张灏笔下的梁启超则要平静得多。在理解梁启超关于主权和社会组织理论的根源分析方面，本书中的观点颇有助益。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Benjamin Schwartz, In Search of Wealth and Power：Yen Fu and the West（Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1964）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">19世纪末，严复将赫胥黎、斯宾塞、弥尔和孟德斯鸠等人的著作译为中文。他本人的思想若放在世界范围内来评估，也是极具影响力的。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Victor Purcell, The Boxer Uprising：A Background Study（Cambridge, Eng.：Cambridge University Press，1963）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">义和团运动到底是场自发性的社会动乱，还是官方蓄意组织的运动？普西尓为了回答这个颇有争议的问题，就民众运动提出了不少真知灼见。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text"><b class="calibre4">第十一章　天命已尽</b></p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Meribeth Cameron, The Reform Movement in China，1898—1912（Stanford：Stanford University Press，1931）</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一本关于清末各项改革运动的基础读物。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Jerome Ch'en, Yuan Shih-k'ai（Stanford：Stanford University Press，1972）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">一部优秀的政治人物传记。本书为第二版。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Ralph Powell, The Rise of Chinese Military Power，1895—1912（Princeton：Princeton University Press，1955）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本书强调了袁世凯和朝廷为争夺兵权展开的争斗。阅读本书的同时，也应该参考下面那篇文章。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Stephen R. Mackinnon，"The Peiyang Army, Yuan Shih-k'ai, and the Origins of Modern Chinese Warlordism，"journal of Asian Studies（May，1973）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">鲍威尔认为军阀割据是由军事改革引起的。麦金农驳斥了这种观点。他的研究虽然非常重要，但也并未完全解决这一论题。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Michael Gasster, Chinese Intellectuals and the Revolution of　1911（Seattle：University of Washington Press，1969）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">本书详细分析了章炳麟及其他激进分子的思想。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Harold Schiffrin, Sun Yat-sen and the Origins of the Chinese Revolution（Berkeley：University of California Press，1970）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">第一部关于孙中山在革命中所扮角色的可靠之作。</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">Mary C. Wright, ed.，China in Revolution：The First Phase，1900—1913（New Haven：Yale University Press，1971）.</p>

  <p class="bodycontent-text">这是一部出色的论文集：不仅收录了关于辛亥革命各方面分析的最新学术成果，还提供了足够资料，供读者反复思索。</p>
</body>
</html>